Oliver Snow's Diary

3/1/2017

It has been a crazy Christmas break back home with tons of family time so I haven't been able to look at the project in a couple weeks. However, it is a new year so it is back to work. 
After talking to Lars before the break, I decided to run SOAPdenovo again with kmer=30 as 63 seemed a bit high. Marina was going to run Abyss with the same two kmer values for comparison. I submitted the job before my flights and once back in Canada, I checked the output and saw that everything had run nicely.
This run took significatnly longer at 23 min which is to be expected with a lower kmer, but still quite quick. Surprisingly the N50 got worse at 129 bp which is still quite small. 
Perhaps this is acceptable for the purposes of our project and we will have to move on to the next steps. Taner is working on using mummer to extract chloroplast contigs and then to annotate them with blast. I will check in with the others and make sure we are on track as there are not many days left for the project. 
13/12/2016

Lars fixed our data on the weekend so that we now have two fastq files with one set of reads in one file and their pairs in the other file. This is much easier for running SOAP anyway so that was good. 
I created a config file for running SOAP which can be found in our project directory on UPPMAX. The main parameters I chose were insert size=300, max read length=100, and kmer as 63 based on what other people had used.
It took me quite a while to figure out how call SOAP on the command line as the documentation was surprisingly bad on this detail. Turns you have to specify the mode and call it as "SOAPdenovo-63mer" with options and config file after. 
Once I figured this out, I wrote a small sbatch script to submit the job to UPPMAX. I used the project code for our class, chose p=node and n=8 based on what we used in the labs (not sure if this has changed for the project). I also submitted for a time of 12 hrs because I had no idea how long it would take. 
The job submitted normally and once making it through the queue it ran quite quickly ~10min or so. This seemed alarmingly fast, however, there are plenty of output files and no glaring errors in the log file. The log file says that the N50 is 212bp which is very small but perhaps this is okay considering the genome is small and we are not dealing with a full data set. 
I will have to spend a bit of time to check and make sure things ran properly and that we have received the right output. Perhaps we will meet with or talk to Lars before the break to make sure that we are on the right track. 

...

8/12/2016

We received our dataset yesterday and had the second seminar session for the projects. Our data is one fastq file containing alternating paired reads from nuclear, mitochondria and chloroplast. 
According to Lars, it will be a majority of nuclear DNA but the only DNA with enough coverage to assemble will be chloroplast DNA. We can then assume that most of our contigs will be chloroplast. However, we will have to still use a method to extract the contigs, either using NUCmer or BLAST. 
I attempted to run SOAPdenovo, but unfortunately it will only take paired reads in one file if it is a regular fasta file. I started looking at converting the file from fastq to fasta or to separate the reads into two separate files.
When I looked at the file though, I noticed that the reads were not interleaved as they should be. I brought this to Lars' attention and apparently we received the wrong file.
I look forward to getting the next file and hopefully I can easily run this in SOAP. 

...

5/12/2016

Still waiting to get our dataset so in the meantime I have been looking into how to use SOAPdenovo as this will be our chosen assembler. I think we will also try ABySS to try to compare assemblers. I have been reading about how to make our config file for running the assembler and they provide a template on their website, however, it is difficult to know what to change until we have our data. 
I have also been thinking about how we will extract the chloroplast contigs from the assembly and was reading into the mummer package. It seems like we might be able to use the NUCmer sub module to align our assembled contigs with a chloroplast reference genome as it was stated that these genes are well conserved. In this way we could get those contigs that are chloroplast. It seems like NUCmer is pretty straightforward to run but I am not sure what the output will be, as in whether we just get an alignment or if we can extract the whole contigs. We could possibly do some filtering before running NUCmer as well by controlling for GC content or coverage as this would reduce the memory load for NUCmer and maybe make our alignment better. 
And for genome annotation we can probably just use blast along with the refseq for the chloroplast genome but that is far away at this point.

...

30/11/2016

Met today before the seminar with my group members to discuss preliminary plans for the project and layout the different steps. 
We looked into different assemblers available to use and thought that SOAPdenovo or velvet may be good options as they are applicable to different types of genomes and seem to be fast and accurate. 
We talked about how to use mummer for extracting contigs specific to chloroplast and how to use blast to search for genes. 
We also thought about using FRC to assess the quality of our assembly as well as such metrics like N50. 

...

28/11/2016

First Entry! 

I have read the projet instructions sent by Lars and have begun to explore some of the possible tools to use (mummer, assemblers, draw tools etc).
I have also begun to read the paper on the draft spruce genome published by researchers from Scilife for some background. 

Will be meeting with my group members soon to hash out a plan for beginning the project. 
